Tools and diagnostics (#21168)
dotnet/docs: docs/fundamentals/tools-and-productivity.md

---

> title: Tools and productivity in .NET

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Tools and diagnostics in .NET
```

author: IEvangelist

> description: Learn about the various tooling, software development kits, diagnostic tools, and code analyzers available to .NET developers.

Reviewer 2: Tooling and diagnostic tools seems repetitive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Learn about the development and diagnostic tools available to .NET developers.
```

ms.author: dapine
ms.date: 10/20/2020
ms.topic: overview
---

# Tools and productivity in .NET

> In this article, you'll learn about the various tools available to .NET developers. With .NET, you have a robust software development kit (SDK), that includes a command-line interface (CLI) namely, the .NET CLI. The .NET CLI powers many of the features throughout the .NET-ready integrated development environments (IDEs). This article also provides resources to productivity capabilities, such as .NET CLI tools for diagnosing performance issues, memory leaks, high CPU, deadlocks, and as well as tooling support for code analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this article, you'll learn about the various tools available to .NET developers. With .NET, you have a robust software development kit (SDK) that includes a command-line interface (CLI). The .NET CLI powers many of the features throughout the .NET-ready integrated development environments (IDEs). This article also provides resources to productivity capabilities, such as .NET CLI tools for diagnosing performance issues, memory leaks, high CPU, deadlocks, and tooling support for code analysis.
```

Reviewer: "robust" SDK sounds like marketing language

"powers" is vague

"resources to productivity capabilities" sounds awkward

Given the whole article is an overview, it's not necessary to go over all the details in the intro paragraph.  Could replace this with something like "This article provides an overview of the development and diagnostic tools available for .NET."

## Tools

> Many tools are available to .NET developers, such as the .NET SDK, .NET CLI, IDEs, and so on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Many tools are available to .NET developers, such as the .NET SDK, .NET CLI, and IDEs.
```

Reviewer: I would get rid of this h2 and elevate the h3s under it to h2s.

### .NET SDK

> You can download [.NET SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download) or .NET Runtime for Windows, Linux, macOS, or Docker. For more information, see [.NET SDK overview](../core/sdk.md).

Reviewer: A brief description of the SDK would be helpful here.  Downloading the runtime is not relevant here, but it could be mentioned as something included in the SDK.

### .NET CLI

The .NET CLI is a cross-platform toolchain for developing, building, running, and publishing .NET applications. The .NET CLI is included with the .NET SDK. For more information, see [.NET CLI overview](../core/tools/index.md).

### IDEs

> The .NET SDK powers language services, that exposes .NET developer functionality in [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com). As part of the [Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs) family, [Visual Studio for Mac](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/mac) enables macOS developers to write .NET applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The .NET SDK powers language services that expose .NET developer functionality in [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com). As part of the [Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs) family, [Visual Studio for Mac](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/mac) enables macOS developers to write .NET applications.
```

Reviewer 2: The wording here is a little confusing as to what point you're trying to make. Are you trying to list all the SDKs or point out that the .NET SDK powers the language services?

> The .NET SDK powers language services, that exposes .NET developer functionality in [Visual Studio Code](https://code.visualstudio.com). As part of the [Visual Studio](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs) family, [Visual Studio for Mac](https://visualstudio.microsoft.com/vs/mac) enables macOS developers to write .NET applications.

Reviewer: "the SDK powers" is vague language that doesn't help explain what IDEs are available and their respective advantages. A bulleted list or set  of h3s here could present the IDE choices and how you might choose among them.

### Additional tools

> In addition to the more common tools, the .NET team has also provided tools for specific scenarios. Some of the use cases include uninstalling the .NET SDK or the .NET Runtime, or retrieving Windows Communication Foundation (WCF) metadata, and generating proxy source code, XML serialization, and so on. For more information, see [.NET additional tools overview](../core/additional-tools/index.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to the more common tools, .NET also provides tools for specific scenarios. Some of the use cases include uninstalling the .NET SDK or the .NET Runtime, retrieving Windows Communication Foundation (WCF) metadata, generating proxy source code, and serializing XML. For more information, see [.NET additional tools overview](../core/additional-tools/index.md).
```

## Productivity

> Being a productive developer includes relying on tooling to analyze application performance.

Reviewer 2: Code analysis does more than just analyze performance.

Reviewer: I would remove this h2 and elevate the h3s to h2s.

Author: I was thinking about that initially too, happy you suggested it.

### Diagnostics and instrumentation

> As a .NET developer, common performance diagnostic tools exist to monitor app performance, profile app with tracing, collect performance metrics, and analyze dump files. You collect performance metrics with EventCounters, and use profiling tools to gain insights into how apps perform. For more information, see [.NET diagnostics tools](../core/diagnostics/index.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a .NET developer, you can make use of common performance diagnostic tools to monitor app performance, profile apps with tracing, collect performance metrics, and analyze dump files. You collect performance metrics with event counters, and use profiling tools to gain insights into how apps perform. For more information, see [.NET diagnostics tools](../core/diagnostics/index.md).
```

### Code analysis

The .NET compiler platform (Roslyn) analyzers inspect your C# or Visual Basic code for code quality and code style issues. For more information, see [.NET source code analysis overview](code-analysis/overview.md).

## See also

> - [.NET project SDKs](../core/project-sdk/overview.md)

Reviewer 2: It seems a bit odd that this TOC entry is listed as a "see also" and the others are each under headings in the article with a brief intro.
